[Docs] Add testing guide (#1805)
sequinstream/sequin: docs/how-to/testing.mdx

---
title: "Testing with Sequin"
sidebarTitle: "Testing and CI"
description: "Learn how to use `sequin.yml`, Sequin's CLI, and the management API to test your sinks locally and in CI."
---

> This guide explains the best practices for unit testing your code with Sequin as well as testing Sequin in a CI environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ## What should you test?
> 
> You should test that your sink configuration (especially the [filters](/reference/filters), [transforms](/reference/transforms), and [routing](/reference/routing)) is working as expected. You should also test the payload delivered to the destination matches your assertions - this is particularly helpful as you migrate your database schema.
> 
> In CI, you should test that Sequin can properly integrate with your infrastructure with an end-to-end test.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What to test

It is valuable to test Sequin configuration that developers are responsible for writing and maintaining, especially source configuration, [filters](/reference/filters), [transforms](/reference/transforms), and [routing](/reference/routing).

It is also valuable to test end-to-end connectivity between your source databases and sink destinations, often in a cloud CI environment.
```

> ## Prerequisites
> 
> To properly test your Sequin configuration, you'll need to stand up test and CI environments for your database and Sequin. This is largely dependent on you've already set up these environments. Generally speaking, you'll need:
> 
> - Tooling to run Sequin in a test environment (e.g. Docker, Helm, etc.)
> - A test / CI database with logical replication enabled
> - A sequin.yml file that creates the sinks you need to test in your test / CI environment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Prerequisites

Before testing, you should familiarize yourself with Sequin and develop a set of sinks that you want to test. You'll also need a test or CI environment for your application infrastructure.

- A `sequin.yaml` file for your sinks that you want to test. This is used to programmatically configure Sequin in test environments
- Tooling to run Sequin in your test environment (e.g. Docker, Helm, etc.)
- A test / CI database with logical replication enabled
```

    Create a new `docker-compose.test.yml` (or helm, etc.) file that includes all the [necessary services](/running-sequin) to run Sequin in a test environment. This should include the Sequin service and it's dependent Postgres and Redis services. A couple considerations:

    1. Ensure that the Sequin service boots up using your test environment variables and the `sequin.yml` configuration file:

        ```yaml
        sequin:
          # ...
          CONFIG_FILE_PATH: sequin.test.yml
        ```

    2. For testing, you don't need to spin up Prometheus and Grafana.
    3. You can safely disable telemetry by setting the `TELEMETRY_ENABLED` environment variable to `false`.

  </Step>

  <Step title="Write and run your tests">
    Write tests to verify that your sink configuration is working as expected. This includes:

    - Verifying that the correct data is being delivered to the destination. Assert that the payload matches your expectations.
    - Verifying that filters are excluding and including the correct changes.
    - Verifying that dynamic routers are working as you'd expect.
    - Verifying that your transforms are working as you'd expect.

>     <Note>
>       You should test Sequin synchronously. This ensures that your tests are not affected by race conditions.
>     </Note>
>     <Note>
>       Be sure that transactions are **fully committed** to your test database if you expect them to be reflected in your Sequin tests. Often ORMs will automatically rollback transactions.
>     </Note>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <Note>
      Be sure that transactions are **fully committed** to your test database if you expect them to be replicated through Sequin.
      
      Some ORMs use transaction isolation to allow concurrent testing which must be disabled to allow messages to replicate to Sequin. This, however, requires that tests are run sequentially instead of in parallel.
    </Note>
```
